---
layout: post
title: "Roadmap"
subtitle: RoadMap to learn DSA
tags: [DSA]
---

## Basic Data-Structures
> These are considered basic. Everyone should know how they work, when to use them, how to implement them and the reasoning behind their tradeoffs:

- Array
- Set
- Hashmap
- Linked List
- Stack
- Queue
- Tree
- Graph

Hashmaps build upon Arrays. Stacks build upon LinkedLists or Arrays. Queues build upon LinkedLists. Trees share concepts of “nodes” and “links” from LinkedList. Graphs also share the same concepts. They also have a lot of similarities to trees. All trees are technically graphs too so you can apply a lot of the same techniques to them.

## Advanced Data-Structures
> After mastering the basic data-structures, knowing these more advanced ones will give you a higher chance of success. Some come up very often during interviews like Heaps and Binary Search Trees. LRU Caches and Tries come up less frequently but are becoming more common. Disjoint Sets and Skip Lists rarely come up, but even if not explicitly asked about them, they can be powerful tools to help you come up with quick and performant solutions.

- Heap (a.k.a Priority Queue)
- LRU Cache
- Binary Search Tree (AVL, Redblack)
- Disjoint Set
- Trie
- Skip List

As we go into more advanced data-structures you’ll see they are usually made using the basic ones as building blocks. Getting a good understanding of the basic data-structures will make learning these advanced ones much easier. You’ll think of them in terms of the smaller structures you already know rather than big new complicated structures.

1. Heaps, also known as Priority Queues are a type of tree that behave like a queue. Binary Search Trees (BSTs) are another type of tree that make it faster to search for nodes. AVL and Redblack are two popular specific types of balanced BSTs. An LRU Cache is a memory efficient cache built by combining a Hashmap with a LinkedList.

2. A Trie is another type of tree that makes prefix/substring searches fast. Disjoint Sets are a special type of set that separate its members into non-overlapping subsets, useful for the Union Find algorithm. A Skip List is an optimized version of a LinkedList that reduces the time it takes to find certain nodes.

## Basic Searching/Traversal Algorithms
All data structures are meant to hold information. Some structures need specials ways to access this information efficiently that are more involved than simply accessing an array index or hashmap key. Data-structures that hold collections of data such as Trees and Graphs use a few basic algorithms to access the information within.

- Breadth First Search (BFS)
- Depth First Search (DFS)
- Binary Search
- Advanced Searching/Traversal Algorithms
- There is a ton of research in this field, but for the purposes of a tech interview, the most advanced searching algorithms you’ll likely come across in order of frequency are:

- Quick Select
- Dijkstra
- Bellman-Ford
- A-star (rare)

## Sorting Algorithms
Sorting is a common tool used to increase the performance of a solution. There are many sorting algorithms, but the most popular for interviews are listed below. Know how to implement all of these without looking anything up.

- Quick Sort
- Merge Sort
- Topological Sort
- Counting Sort

## Important Topics
Recursion is an extremely important topic that doesn’t come up as much in day to day software engineering as it does during interviews. Bit manipulation may seem scary at first, but once you take time to understand the binary number format and operations you’ll realize how simple it is.

- Recursion
- Greedy Algorithms
- Dynamic Programming
- Bit Manipulation (AND, NOT, OR, XOR)
- Common Patterns


## These patterns can be used to solve many similar algorithms questions

- Backtracking
- Two Pointers
- Sliding Window
- Divide & Conquer
- Reservoir Sampling
- Math based problems
- Permutations
- Combinations
- Factorial
- Power Set
- Other Common Problems
- String to Integer
- Integer to String
- Adding huge numbers (that can’t fit into memory)
- Addition/Subtraction/Multiplication/Division without using operators